<!-- TOC titleSize:1 tabSpaces:2 depthFrom:1 depthTo:6 withLinks:1 updateOnSave:1 orderedList:0 skip:0 title:1 charForUnorderedList:* -->
# Table of Contents
- [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Other kinds of dependencies](#other-kinds-of-dependencies)
  - [Multivalued dependencies](#multivalued-dependencies)
  - [Fourth normal form](#fourth-normal-form)
  - [Join dependencies](#join-dependencies)
  - [Fifth normal form](#fifth-normal-form)
  - [Inclusion dependencies](#inclusion-dependencies)
<!-- /TOC -->

# Other kinds of dependencies
FDs are probably the most common and important kind of constraint from the point
of view of database design. However, there are several other kinds of dependencies.
In particular, there is a well-developed theory for database design using multivalued
dependencies and join dependencies. By taking such dependencies into account, we
can identify potential redundancy problems that cannot be detected using FDs alone.
This section illustrates the kinds of redundancy that can be detected using multivalued
dependencies. Our main observation, however, is that simple guidelines (which can be
checked using only FD reasoning) can tell us whether we even need to worry about
complex constraints such as multivalued and join dependencies. We also comment on
the role of inclusion dependencies in database design.

## Multivalued dependencies
Suppose that we have a relation with attributes course, teacher, and book, which we
denote as CTB. The meaning of a tuple is that teacher T can teach course C, and book
B is a recommended text for the course. There are no FDs; the key is CTB. However,
the recommended texts for a course are independent of the instructor. The instance
shown in Figure 15.13 illustrates this situation.
course teacher book
Physics101 Green Mechanics
Physics101 Green Optics
Physics101 Brown Mechanics
Physics101 Brown Optics
Math301 Green Mechanics
Math301 Green Vectors
Math301 Green Geometry
Figure 15.13 BCNF Relation with Redundancy That Is Revealed by MVDs
There are three points to note here:
The relation schema CTB is in BCNF; thus we would not consider decomposing
it further if we looked only at the FDs that hold over CTB.
There is redundancy. The fact that Green can teach Physics101 is recorded once
per recommended text for the course. Similarly, the fact that Optics is a text for
Physics101 is recorded once per potential teacher.
The redundancy can be eliminated by decomposing CTB into CT and CB.
The redundancy in this example is due to the constraint that the texts for a course are
independent of the instructors, which cannot be expressed in terms of FDs. This constraint is an example of a multivalued dependency, or MVD. Ideally, we should model
this situation using two binary relationship sets, Instructors with attributes CT and
Text with attributes CB. Because these are two essentially independent relationships,
modeling them with a single ternary relationship set with attributes CTB is inappropriate. (See Section 2.5.3 for a further discussion of ternary versus binary relationships.)
Given the subjectivity of ER design, however, we might create a ternary relationship.
A careful analysis of the MVD information would then reveal the problem.
Let R be a relation schema and let X and Y be subsets of the attributes of R. Intuitively,
the multivalued dependency X !! Y is said to hold over R if, in every legal
instance r of R, each X value is associated with a set of Y values and this set is
independent of the values in the other attributes.
Formally, if the MVD X !! Y holds over R and Z = R − XY , the following must be
true for every legal instance r of R:
If t1 2 r, t2 2 r and t1:X = t2:X, then there must be some t3 2 r such that
t1:XY = t3:XY and t2:Z = t3:Z.
Figure 15.14 illustrates this definition. If we are given the first two tuples and told that
the MVD X !! Y holds over this relation, we can infer that the relation instance
must also contain the third tuple. Indeed, by interchanging the roles of the first two
tuples|treating the first tuple as t2 and the second tuple as t1|we can deduce that
the tuple t4 must also be in the relation instance.
X Y Z
a b1 c1 | tuple t1
a b2 c2 | tuple t2
a b1 c2 | tuple t3
a b2 c1 | tuple t4
Figure 15.14 Illustration of MVD Definition
This table suggests another way to think about MVDs: If X !! Y holds over R, then
πY Z(σX=x(R)) = πY (σX=x(R)) × πZ(σX=x(R)) in every legal instance of R, for
any value x that appears in the X column of R. In other words, consider groups of
tuples in R with the same X-value, for each X-value. In each such group consider the
projection onto the attributes YZ. This projection must be equal to the cross-product
of the projections onto Y and Z. That is, for a given X-value, the Y-values and Zvalues are independent. (From this definition it is easy to see that X !! Y must hold
whenever X ! Y holds. If the FD X ! Y holds, there is exactly one Y-value for a
given X-value, and the conditions in the MVD definition hold trivially. The converse
does not hold, as Figure 15.14 illustrates.)
Returning to our CTB example, the constraint that course texts are independent of
instructors can be expressed as C !! T. In terms of the definition of MVDs, this
constraint can be read as follows:
\If (there is a tuple showing that) C is taught by teacher T,
and (there is a tuple showing that) C has book B as text,
then (there is a tuple showing that) C is taught by T and has text B.
Given a set of FDs and MVDs, in general we can infer that several additional FDs
and MVDs hold. A sound and complete set of inference rules consists of the three
Armstrong Axioms plus five additional rules. Three of the additional rules involve
only MVDs:
MVD Complementation: If X !! Y, then X !! R − XY .
MVD Augmentation: If X !! Y and W ⊇ Z, then WX !! YZ.
MVD Transitivity: If X !! Y and Y !! Z, then X !! (Z − Y ).
As an example of the use of these rules, since we have C !! T over CTB, MVD
complementation allows us to infer that C !! CTB − CT as well, that is, C !! B.
The remaining two rules relate FDs and MVDs:
Replication: If X ! Y, then X !! Y.
Coalescence: If X !! Y and there is a W such that W \ Y is empty, W ! Z,
and Y ⊇ Z, then X ! Z.
Observe that replication states that every FD is also an MVD.

## Fourth normal form
Fourth normal form is a direct generalization of BCNF. Let R be a relation schema,
X and Y be nonempty subsets of the attributes of R, and F be a set of dependencies
that includes both FDs and MVDs. R is said to be in fourth normal form (4NF)
if for every MVD X !! Y that holds over R, one of the following statements is true:
Y ⊆ X or XY = R, or
X is a superkey.
In reading this definition, it is important to understand that the definition of a key
has not changed|the key must uniquely determine all attributes through FDs alone.
X !! Y is a trivial MVD if Y ⊆ X ⊆ R or XY = R; such MVDs always hold.
The relation CTB is not in 4NF because C !! T is a nontrivial MVD and C is not
a key. We can eliminate the resulting redundancy by decomposing CTB into CT and
CB; each of these relations is then in 4NF.
To use MVD information fully, we must understand the theory of MVDs. However,
the following result due to Date and Fagin identifies conditions|detected using only
FD information!|under which we can safely ignore MVD information. That is, using
MVD information in addition to the FD information will not reveal any redundancy.
Therefore, if these conditions hold, we do not even need to identify all MVDs.
If a relation schema is in BCNF, and at least one of its keys consists of a
single attribute, it is also in 4NF.
An important assumption is implicit in any application of the preceding result: The
set of FDs identified thus far is indeed the set of all FDs that hold over the relation.
This assumption is important because the result relies on the relation being in BCNF,
which in turn depends on the set of FDs that hold over the relation.
We illustrate this point using an example. Consider a relation schema ABCD and
suppose that the FD A ! BCD and the MVD B !! C are given. Considering only
these dependencies, this relation schema appears to be a counter example to the result.
The relation has a simple key, appears to be in BCNF, and yet is not in 4NF because
B !! C causes a violation of the 4NF conditions. But let’s take a closer look.
Figure 15.15 shows three tuples from an instance of ABCD that satisfies the given
MVD B !! C. From the definition of an MVD, given tuples t1 and t2, it follows
B C A D
b c1 a1 d1 | tuple t1
b c2 a2 d2 | tuple t2
b c1 a2 d2 | tuple t3
Figure 15.15 Three Tuples from a Legal Instance of ABCD
that tuple t3 must also be included in the instance. Consider tuples t2 and t3. From
the given FD A ! BCD and the fact that these tuples have the same A-value, we can
deduce that c1 = c2. Thus, we see that the FD B ! C must hold over ABCD whenever
the FD A ! BCD and the MVD B !! C hold. If B ! C holds, the relation ABCD
is not in BCNF (unless additional FDs hold that make B a key)!
Thus, the apparent counter example is really not a counter example|rather, it illustrates the importance of correctly identifying all FDs that hold over a relation. In
this example A ! BCD is not the only FD; the FD B ! C also holds but was not
identified initially. Given a set of FDs and MVDs, the inference rules can be used to
infer additional FDs (and MVDs); to apply the Date-Fagin result without first using
the MVD inference rules, we must be certain that we have identified all the FDs.
In summary, the Date-Fagin result offers a convenient way to check that a relation is
in 4NF (without reasoning about MVDs) if we are confident that we have identified
all FDs. At this point the reader is invited to go over the examples we have discussed
in this chapter and see if there is a relation that is not in 4NF.

## Join dependencies
A join dependency is a further generalization of MVDs. A join dependency (JD)
./ fR1; : : : ; Rng is said to hold over a relation R if R1; : : : ; Rn is a lossless-join
decomposition of R.
An MVD X !! Y over a relation R can be expressed as the join dependency ./ fXY,
X(R−Y)g. As an example, in the CTB relation, the MVD C !! T can be expressed
as the join dependency ./ fCT, CBg.
Unlike FDs and MVDs, there is no set of sound and complete inference rules for JDs.

## Fifth normal form
A relation schema R is said to be in fifth normal form (5NF) if for every JD
./ fR1; : : : ; Rng that holds over R, one of the following statements is true:
Ri = R for some i, or
The JD is implied by the set of those FDs over R in which the left side is a key
for R.
The second condition deserves some explanation, since we have not presented inference
rules for FDs and JDs taken together. Intuitively, we must be able to show that the
decomposition of R into fR1; : : : ; Rng is lossless-join whenever the key dependencies (FDs in which the left side is a key for R) hold. ./ fR1; : : : ; Rng is a trivial
JD if Ri = R for some i; such a JD always holds.
The following result, also due to Date and Fagin, identifies conditions|again, detected
using only FD information|under which we can safely ignore JD information.
If a relation schema is in 3NF and each of its keys consists of a single attribute,
it is also in 5NF.
The conditions identified in this result are sufficient for a relation to be in 5NF, but not
necessary. The result can be very useful in practice because it allows us to conclude
that a relation is in 5NF without ever identifying the MVDs and JDs that may hold
over the relation.

## Inclusion dependencies
MVDs and JDs can be used to guide database design, as we have seen, although they
are less common than FDs and harder to recognize and reason about. In contrast
inclusion dependencies are very intuitive and quite common. However, they typically
have little influence on database design (beyond the ER design stage).
Informally, an inclusion dependency is a statement of the form that some columns of
a relation are contained in other columns (usually of a second relation). A foreign key
constraint is an example of an inclusion dependency; the referring column(s) in one
relation must be contained in the primary key column(s) of the referenced relation. As
another example, if R and S are two relations obtained by translating two entity sets
such that every R entity is also an S entity, we would have an inclusion dependency;
projecting R on its key attributes yields a relation that is contained in the relation
obtained by projecting S on its key attributes.
The main point to bear in mind is that we should not split groups of attributes that
participate in an inclusion dependency. For example, if we have an inclusion dependency AB ⊆ CD, while decomposing the relation schema containing AB, we should
ensure that at least one of the schemas obtained in the decomposition contains both
A and B. Otherwise, we cannot check the inclusion dependency AB ⊆ CD without
reconstructing the relation containing AB.
Most inclusion dependencies in practice are key-based, that is, involve only keys. Foreign key constraints are a good example of key-based inclusion dependencies. An ER
diagram that involves ISA hierarchies also leads to key-based inclusion dependencies.
If all inclusion dependencies are key-based, we rarely have to worry about splitting
attribute groups that participate in inclusions, since decompositions usually do not
split the primary key. Note, however, that going from 3NF to BCNF always involves
splitting some key (hopefully not the primary key!), since the dependency guiding the
split is of the form X ! A where A is part of a key.